---
layout: post
title: Mini foosball table
date: 2024-11-25 11:12:00-0400
description: Design, manufacturing, and assembly of a scaled-down foosball table
tags: 
categories: 
thumbnail: assets/img/foosball.jpg
related_posts: false
images:
    slider: true
---

The goals of this manufacturing project were to define product specifications using CAD software, outline component requirements by developing manufacturing process plans, gain experience with simple machine shop machines (lathe, mill, drill press, etc.), manage internal and external resources, and build and test the final design. 

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/foosball-1.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/foosball-2.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Final product of the mini foosball table.
</div>

The project also highlights the important differences between design for manufacturability (DFM) and design for assembly (DFA). DFM focuses on making individual parts easy and cost-effective to manufacture while DFA focuses on minimizing the time, cost, and errors involved in assembling those parts into a finished product. There are several tradeoffs that were observed between DFM and DFA, trying to bring a CAD model to life, and through understanding the practical capabilities of the available machines.

---

### Design

Each component was designed and modeled in SOLIDWORKS to visualize a baseline assembly. This version featured 10 player models and had dimensions 12.5 x 19.75 inches. 

<div class="row mt-3">
  <div class="col-12">
    {% include figure.liquid
      loading="eager"
      path="assets/img/foosball-assembly.jpg"
      class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1"
    %}
  </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    The initial CAD assembly for the mini foosball table, showing the original key components: base, goal walls, side walls, player, and rod. 
</div>

This assembly was helpful in streamlining the manufacturing process plans for the key components, but it is not representative of the final product for several reasons. During the manufacturing phase, back walls were designed and manufactured to create a space to collect the ball once a goal has been scored; bushings were selected to allow near-frictionless movement of the rods through the through holes in the side walls; player heads were 3D printed in two different colors to distinguish between teams; handles were manufactured and attached to the rods for comfortable control of players; and bumpers were added to rods with 2 players to prevent unwanted contact with the side walls. 

---

### Manufacturing and assembly

A wide variety of machines were used in the manufacturing processes, including the lathe, mill, band and drop saws, and drill press. The saws were primarily used to make preliminary cuts in the raw material for each component. The drill press was used to make through holes in the side walls and the player bases. The lathe was used to turn down the players (machined using stock Aluminum) into equal sizes and was then programmed to do a revolve cut to achieve a geometry similar to a standard foosball player model. A similar approach was used to turn down the ends of the handles to make them hemispherical in shape. The lathe was further used to drill center holes in the tops of the players (for assembly with the 3D printed heads) and the handles (for assembly with the rods).

<swiper-container class="media-swiper" keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/player-sketch.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/player-lathe-cutting-path.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include video.liquid path="assets/img/lathe_player.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/lathe-drilling.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

The mill was then used to flatten a bottom section on the player models to create an optimal contact surface with the game ball. It was also used to create the goal cavity in the goal walls, as well as ensure that all walls are of equal height. 

<swiper-container class="media-swiper" keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include video.liquid path="assets/img/mill_player.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/foosball-walls.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include video.liquid path="assets/img/mill_goal.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true autoplay=true %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>

Of all machined components, the part that differs the most from the original concept is the player base, due to the heightened complexity of the first iteration. The finalized geometry reflects a more simpler design based on the amount of time available to complete the machining and the resources available. Because of how each component interfaces, system-level assembly was especially important. Precision was emphasized as the assembly phase began, as threaded inserts were carefully distributed to ensure the walls, base, and player rods lined up. Bushings were ordered from McMaster-Carr so that the rods could translate with little friction.

<swiper-container class="media-swiper" keyboard="true" navigation="true" pagination="true" pagination-clickable="true" pagination-dynamic-bullets="true" rewind="true">
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/wall-player-assembly.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/wall-bushings.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
  <swiper-slide>{% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/final-assembly.jpg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}</swiper-slide>
</swiper-container>



